ladies and gentlemen welcome back to
part
12 of our look at modern physics
today we are going to take our
understanding of general relativity
the flow of space-time the curvature of
space-time and apply it
to a new more modern understanding of
black holes
so without further ado let's dive into
it
so we actually proposed an idea of what
a black hole
is just based on newtonian physics you
recall that we talked about the concept
of surface gravity
and escape velocity and we noted that an
object whose mass is condensed into a
small enough radius
can have a surface gravity that is so
great
that the escape velocity from the
surface of that object
would exceed the speed of light and
therefore
any object that fell onto that object
would not be able to escape because
nothing can go faster than the speed of
light
this would be true of light as well if
is indeed affected by gravity like
everything else
but even before einstein's work newton
had argued that light is a particle
and like any particle light should be
affected by gravity
and so even from a newtonian's
perspective one could argue that
if light moved at a finite speed which
had already been
speculated and somewhat determined by
the time of newton's work
then light could be trapped by such an
object the newtonian perspective of a
black hole implies that gravity is a
force that reaches out from this super
dense object and grabs onto
and holds onto other things including
light
in the einsteinian perspective of
gravity in general relativity
gravity is not a force at all but
gravity instead
is the result of the flow or the
curvature of space-time itself
around a massive object which means that
to define a black hole from the
perspective of general relativity
means talking about the nature of space
and time around
this super dense object so what is a
black hole from the einsteinian
perspective
well according to general relativity a
black hole could be thought of
as a region of space so
severely distorted by a high
concentration of matter
that space time flows inward faster than
the speed of light
okay so let's slow down and talk about
what that means
remember earlier we had talked about
that from einstein's perspective
the acceleration of space-time inward
and the feeling of gravity pulling
down are equivalent and so if the
newtonian perspective says gravity is a
force that is pulling down towards this
object
then from an einsteinian perspective one
could argue that in fact it's space time
flowing inward towards
this object and the idea is is this
object is
so condensed so compact just like we
argued from the newtonian perspective
that space-time can flow faster and
faster and faster
before you reach the surface of the
super dense object
and at some point space time can flow
inward
at or even faster than the speed of
light
now before you say wait a minute i
thought nothing could go faster than the
speed of light
remember that relativity says that no
object with any mass
can go faster than the speed of light
and because light
has no mass it actually has to go at the
speed of light
but there's nothing in general
relativity that limits the rate at which
space-time itself can flow it's only
objects that move within space-time
but space-time itself has no limit
to how fast it can flow so let's talk
about exactly what that would mean
with respect to creating a black hole
so one really useful way of modeling
what a black hole
is is to imagine that you have a huge
body of water
and that water is flowing towards some
big sinkhole
in the middle of that body of water now
the image you see here
is a real image this is a reservoir and
that round drain you see is a drain that
sucks water from the reservoir and
diverts it
outside the dam so basically you have
water flowing down
into this big drain now it turns out the
physics of water flowing
into this drain actually match quite
well
the physics of the flow of space-time
into a black hole
now of course in this case the hole
itself
is two-dimensional and water is flowing
along a surface
into this two-dimensional hole that then
drops down into a third dimension
in reality a black hole is not a
two-dimensional circle but a
three-dimensional sphere
with space-time flowing inward in all
directions three-dimensionally
so here's the idea imagine that you are
sitting
in a boat somewhere on this reservoir
far from this sinkhole and you can
imagine that if you're far from the
sinkhole
the rate at which water is flowing
towards the sinkhole
is extremely low in fact it might be so
low that you wouldn't even notice it
even if you sat
in that boat for hours so if you're far
from this object you won't notice it you
won't even feel as though you're being
pulled in
by the flow of the water but if you were
to venture too close
you might notice that you are flowing
towards it
now you could argue you're being pulled
by some force
or you could argue that you are just
moving with the flow of the water
now let's imagine that you're not happy
about this and so you jump
out of the boat and try to swim away now
let's say the fastest that you can swim
is 10 miles an hour well if the water's
flowing towards the hole at one mile an
hour
but you're swimming through the water in
the opposite direction at 10 miles an
hour
then you can escape the pole of that
hole at a net speed of
10 minus 1 or 9 miles an hour
but let's say that you notice this later
in the process
and you only notice it when you're at a
point where the water is flowing inwards
at eight miles an hour
so you jump out of the boat and you
start swimming away from the hole
now can you still escape and of course
the answer is yeah you can still
get away from that sinkhole at a net
rate of about two miles an hour so it's
still escapable
but what if you got to a point where the
water was flowing
in towards the hole at 10 miles an hour
now if you jumped out of the boat at
that point is there some sort of signage
some sort of
magical barrier at that point where the
water is flowing just as fast as you can
swim
no and you would find that when you jump
into the water
no matter how fast you try to swim
upstream
you will inexorably be pulled towards
that hole
and in fact as the rate of the water
flowing towards that hole goes faster
and faster
no matter how fast you swim you are
going to be pulled into that hole
in other words past that point where the
water is flowing at 10 miles an hour in
towards the hole
the hole is now essentially inescapable
you have entered a region of water
surrounding the hole
where you can no longer escape so here
is a way of
visualizing that as the water flows
faster and faster towards the hole
as you get closer and closer to this the
faster you have to swim to stay out of
it
and if at some point the water is
flowing faster than you are capable of
swimming
then you are doomed you are stuck and
you will go down that hole
this is essentially what a black hole is
from einstein's perspective
it is an object where space-time is
flowing
so fast that at some point it flows at
and then within that faster than the
speed of light
and this of course would apply to light
as well no matter how fast light tries
to swim through space which has to be at
the speed of light
if space is flowing inward faster than
that then even at the speed of light
moving through space
it cannot escape the pull of that hole
and so it becomes a black hole in space
literally a region of space that once
you go in you can't get out
a hole so
let's watch a brief video that helps
understand
the physics of a black hole from the
perspective of flowing
water let's take a look near a black
hole
space and time do some very strange
things
because black holes are probably the
most violent places we know of
in the universe this river provides a
beautiful analogy for what happens to
space and time as you get closer and
closer
to the black hole
now upstream the water is flowing pretty
slowly
let's imagine that it's flowing at three
kilometers per hour and i can swim at
four
so i can swim faster than the flow and
can easily
escape
but as you go further and further
downstream towards
the waterfall in the distance the river
flows faster and faster
[Music]
imagine i was to decide to jump into the
river
just there on the edge of the falls the
water is flowing far
faster than i could swim so no matter
what i did no matter how hard i tried
i would not be able to swim back
upstream
i would be carried inexorably towards
the edge
and i would vanish over the falls
well it's the same close to a black hole
because space flows faster and faster
and faster towards the black hole
literally this stuff
my space that i'm in flowing over the
edge
into the black hole and at the very
special points
called the event horizon space is
flowing
at the speed of light into the black
hole
light itself traveling at 300 000
kilometers per second
is not going fast enough to escape the
flow and light itself will plunge
into the black hole
now as you get right to the center then
our understanding of the laws of physics
breaks down
our best theory of space and time
einstein's theory of general relativity
says that space and time become
infinitely curved
that the center of the hole becomes
infinitely dense
that place is called a singularity and
it is the place
where our understanding of the universe
stops
okay welcome back so in this video you
heard the term event horizon defined
and the term event horizon is one of the
most important things to understand
about a black hole from a relativistic
perspective
essentially the event horizon is the
point of no return
it's that place in the water where the
water is flowing faster than you can
swim
there's no signage there's no boundary
there's nothing physical there that
tells you
that this is where the event horizon is
it's just a place
in this case in the water where the
water happens to be flowing faster than
you can swim
so obviously for different swimmers this
point is going to be at a different
distance
from the center of that hole if you can
swim at 20 miles an hour then of course
your event horizon is going to be much
further in
because you are more capable of swimming
upstream
in fast moving water but if you can only
swim at two miles an hour
then your event horizon is going to be
further out but in the case of black
holes
the speed limit is the same for
everybody it's the speed of light and so
the event horizon for any black hole is
going to be that region of space
that distance from the center of the
black hole where space is flowing inward
at the speed of light that is your point
of no return
if anything including light crosses that
boundary it is
never ever getting out back to the rest
of the universe
well remember horizon means the point
past which you can no longer see if you
think of the horizon that you look out
upon where the sky meets the land
that horizon is defined as the point
past which you can no
longer see any more land so that's
literally what we mean by horizon the
farthest that you can see something
what's an event it's anything at all
that happens in space time
and so past the event horizon since
information about that event
can only travel through space at the
speed of light
and nothing not even light
can get out of the black hole past the
event horizon
then you can't know about you can't get
any information about
any events occurring within that
boundary therefore
as viewed from the outside that boundary
literally is a horizon for seeing events
occur
in the universe it is an event horizon
what would that actually look like to
your eyes well essentially what it would
look like
is a region of space that would be not
circular like you see on your screen
but spherical and it would be basically
a big
dark sphere because anything past that
point
you can't see any information about it
now the interesting thing is that dark
sphere isn't itself a solid
object and in fact as we'll see the
black hole itself has no
solidity whatsoever within the event
horizon
there's still space so black holes are
kind of like las vegas
whatever happens within the event
horizon stays within the event horizon
any information about it will never
escape and will ultimately be sucked in
towards the center of the black hole now
what defines where the event horizon is
you'll recall
earlier in a in an earlier lesson when
we talked about gravity we talked about
something called the short shield radius
what was the short shoulder radius it
was the smallest radius any amount of
mass would have to be compacted into
to become an object whose escape
velocity was equal to or greater than
the speed of light
you might recall that for the sun you
have to squeeze it down to something
about the size of a mountain
for earth you'd have to squeeze it down
to something the size of a marble
and for a human being you'd have to
collapse yourself down to
billionths the size of a proton the
short shield radius is basically defined
as where the event horizon would be
for any massive uh black hole so
whatever the mass of the black hole
is the short shield radius is where the
event horizon would be
or put another way any amount of mass
that collapses
in beyond the short shield radius
collapses
in and within its own event horizon and
so as it collapses beyond the event
horizon
you can't see it collapse any further
past that you'll just see it suddenly
goes dark
so basically black holes are objects
that collapse
within their own event horizon and that
is another way of thinking of a black
hole
so what about the center of a black hole
well from the perspective of general
relativity
it is a place where all the matter of
the black hole
all the mass of the black hole is
collapsed
infinitely down so you could think of a
singularity
as singular because it's literally a
single point
a place where space and time narrow
infinitely down
into just this ever falling thread of
space
and time now the event horizon is
obviously somewhere outside of that
singularity so you can see a diagram
here that if this is the singularity the
center of the black hole
then somewhere further out from the
singularity is the event horizon
anything that occurs in space-time above
this red line
theoretically is observable and could
ultimately escape the pull of the black
hole if it could reach incredible speeds
but anything that happens in the region
of space-time below this red circle
is inside of the black hole and can
never escape and will
ultimately and inexorably fall towards
the singularity
okay now here's the interesting thing
the truth about singularities is this
and that is we don't know what they are
because it turns out
general relativity which is an extremely
successful theory
defining how space and time and gravity
behave
on large scales predicts that inside of
a black hole space time
must narrow to zero
but quantum physics another extremely
successful field of physics
that describes the behavior of the
subatomic world with a very high degree
of accuracy
something we'll be talking about in a
few days makes an entirely different
prediction
it says that it's impossible to collapse
matter and energy down
to zero and so general relativity says a
singularity should collapse to zero
quantum physics says it cannot collapse
to zero and they do not produce the same
outcome they don't speak the same
language they don't predict the same
outcome
and so a singularity is essentially
undefinable
in a way that agrees both with general
relativity and
quantum physics and so what a
singularity really represents
is the place where our current
understanding of physics completely
breaks down and that means that
singularities are the current
frontier of astrophysics they are the
holy grail
of theoretical astrophysics right now in
the 21st century
solving the problem of singularities not
only
would ultimately help us understand what
happens inside of a black hole
and what is the ultimate fate of matter
and energy
and information in a black hole but it
turns out it will
also help us understand the origins of
the universe itself
when you think of the big bang you
probably know that the big bang theory
says that the whole universe began from
an infinitely small point
that for some reason rapidly expanded
and gave birth
to space time matter and energy as we
know it
well that little point from which the
universe
expanded is itself also a singularity
the same kind of singularity you find at
the center of a black hole
so it's interesting that the center of a
black hole which is a
finite object within the universe
and the origins of the entire universe
itself
are directly connected to each other
through the exact same
physics so to sum things up
general relativity and quantum physics
are arguably the two
most successful physics theories to come
out of the 20th century
both do an incredibly fantastic job
of explaining the way the universe
behaves on each of their respective
scales
general relativity does a fantastic job
explaining how the very massive
influences space and time around it on a
very large scale
quantum physics does a spectacular job
explaining as strange as it is the weird
behavior
of the subatomic world so the holy grail
of theoretical astrophysics right now
is a theory that combines both general
relativity
and quantum physics into a single theory
that equally if not better predicts all
of the behavior on the large scale
and all of the behavior on the small
scale and also
provides sensical predictions and
explanations
for things that are both massive and
tiny
like singularities that theory
has come to be known as quantum gravity
thus far there is no successful proposal
of quantum gravity that has been tested
and verified
this is the holy grail of 21st century
physics a theory of quantum gravity
there are lots of candidates out there
and people have been working for
decades trying to develop a
self-consistent theory
that successfully explains everything on
all scales
all the way down to singularities and
when that happens
and i'm certain it will it will unlock
mysteries
that will open up a whole new paradigm
shift
in our view of the nature of space time
matter and energy and you can be part of
those discoveries
so we're going to end today by watching
a video to extend our understanding of
what a black hole
is and then next time we'll explore a
little bit more
about what would happen as you approach
a black hole
what would happen as you fall into a
black hole see you next time
[Music]
in a previous episode we discussed the
true nature of black holes
we talked about them as general
relativistic entities
as space-time regions whose boundary
curvature
effectively removes the interior from
our observable universe
now it'd be a great idea to watch this
video first
if you haven't already now these are
some abstract ideas and really
black holes were at first just a strange
construction of general relativity
and just because something exists in the
mathematics
does not mean it has to exist in reality
so
are black holes real the answer is yes
black holes are astrophysical realities
that we have ample evidence for yet to
actually
form a black hole einstein's
descriptions of mass
energy and space time are not enough we
need
quantum mechanics if you're up for it
let's build a black hole first step find
a very massive star
and wait let it cook not for long
because these guys have very short lives
just wait a few million years for the
supernova
the details of the deaths of massive
stars are pretty awesome
but they can be found in lots of places
so we'll just gloss over them here in
the last throws of a very massive star's
life
increasingly frantic fusion in the
interior produces
one periodic table element after another
in russian doll shells of increasingly
heavy nuclei
that finally surround an iron core the
formation of that core
represents the end of exothermic fusion
fusing two iron nuclei absorbs energy
it doesn't release it so starved of an
energy source
the stellar core collapses on itself
electrons are slammed into protons in
the iron nuclei
forging a neutron star the collapsing
outer shells ricochet off this
impossibly dense nugget
in a supernova explosion enriching the
galaxy with
juicy new elements the leftover core the
neutron star
is a very weird beast a ball of neutrons
the size of a city
with the mass of at least 1.4 suns and
the density
of an atomic nucleus until now the
neutron star has
hovered above a critical size the
space-time curvature
at the neutron star's surface is pretty
extreme clocks run noticeably slower
and the densities inside the star
produce some very strange states of
matter
however despite this the star is still
very much a
thing in this universe and yet below the
star's surface there lurks the potential
event horizon
the surface of infinite time dilation
now the event horizon doesn't actually
exist
as long as the neutron star stays larger
than the would be horizon
however if we can increase the mass of
the neutron star
the actual star shrinks and the event
horizon expands
you can see where i'm going with this
there's a mass where the radius of the
neutron star
and the event horizon overlap it's three
times the mass of the sun
at this point the event horizon actually
comes into being
and the neutron star submerges beneath
it
we finally created our black hole but
what happens to the star when it slips
below its event horizon
everything inside is lost from this
universe
space-time is radically altered inside
the star
with all geodesics space-time paths
turning inward towards the center
when the black hole first forms the
material inside
must resemble the stuff of the original
neutron star
but there's no stopping ultimate
collapse
all paths lead to the central point of
infinite curvature
the singularity from the point of view
of the star itself
the inward cascade happens all position
space
collapses towards the singularity
neutrons are certainly
shredded into component quarks and
gluons
but what happens to these as the star
approaches an infinitesimal point
the planck scale physics cannot yet tell
us
from the point of view of an outside
observer so us
this never happens the black hole forms
the stellar core goes dark but on our
timeline nothing ever happens beyond the
event horizon again
we can't meaningfully think about what's
happening now
beneath the event horizon there is no
corresponding now
the material of the star and all events
that happen to it
are no longer a part of the timeline of
the external universe
on our clock the singularity forms
infinitely far in the future
to us there is only the event horizon so
this is how a real astrophysical black
hole is